---
layout: post
title: Ruminations on remuneration & education
subtitle: Does STEM reign supreme as the university major with the king ROI?
---

As university education is increasingly commoditized, it's inevitable that freshmen seek out a curriculum that best secures their chances of gainful employment immediately upon graduation. Of course, university is different than most commodities in that simply coughing up the funds won't guarantee a return. An decent education is more akin to a gym membership than a brand new car, providing the tools for self-development but not guaranteeing a result without hard work.

People with the right combination of passion, skill, and luck can theoretically succeed in any field, with or without an education. Going full-tilt into esoteric academia, or pursuing a trade immediately after high school both have their pros and cons. However, recent data shows that a overwhelming majority of American high school graduates (69.2%){% sidenote side1 [Bureau of Labor Statistics](http://www.bls.gov/news.release/hsgec.nr0.htm "Post-Secondary Enrollment") %} elect to enroll in a college in university soon after, many, at least, in part, for economic benefits.{% sidenote side2 [Pew Research Center](http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/02/11/the-rising-cost-of-not-going-to-college/ "Post-Secondary Enrollment") %}

[//]: # (College enrollment: http://archive.is/vB0kk)
[//]: # (The Rising Cost...: http://archive.is/de89e)

Differential tuition (a model where tuition is priced relative to the cost to provide a program) at American universities has been increasing in popularity.{% sidenote side3 [Cornell Higher Education Research Institute](https://www.ilr.cornell.edu/sites/ilr.cornell.edu/files/2011%20Survey%20of%20Differential%20Tuition%20at%20Public%20Higher%20Education%20Institutions.pdf "Survey of Differential Tuition at Public Higher Education Institutions") (PDF) %} Still, a majority of undergraduate institutions still have a uniform tuition model for all majors, and the upfront cost relatively pricier majors is nevertheless incommesurate with thier sometimes lucrative future earning potential. Thus students looking for a good job upon graduation naturally try to get the most bang out of their buck.

High school students with choices set before them receive "common sense" advice that they should pursue STEM degrees. Many students who are smart enough to qualify for university are unable to reconcile platitudes to the tune of "just be yourself" and "follow your passion" with the zeitgeist (**climate?**) of alarmist anecdotes about graduates with careers in sandwich artistry. 

[//]: # (Cornell Study...: http://archive.is/de89e)

As a result, STEM enrollment is at an all time high (cite). Yet, for students who would otherwise be bored to tears by requirements such as calculus and circuit logic force themselves to slog through the material, motivated by money. Many fail. The ones who succeed may find themselves diving headfirst into competitive yet lucrative indistries, and the truly lucky ones are given oppurtunities to pursue world-changing technolical developments. 

Thus the revenge of the nerds is finally upon us—young people with numerical aptitude are ahead of their peers socioeconomically. Are the others—STEM students who lack the natural devotion of their peers to their field—simply greedy? Not really. Students who dislike school are simply trying to make a living; squeezed out by an economy that allowed the less academically inclined to make an honest living in blue collar work. 

Many STEM programs {% sidenote side4 [Journal of Technology and Science Education](http://www.jotse.org/index.php/jotse/article/download/136/150 "Stem Attrition Among High-performing College Students In The United States: Scope And Potential Causes") (PDF) %} have high dropout rates. More difficult grading is one major factor. {% sidenote side5 [Cornell University](http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/2010/04/tougher-grading-one-reason-high-stem-dropout-rate "Tougher grading is one reason for high STEM dropout rate") %}. But it's ignorant to blame low-performing students for their inability to succeed in such programs; many of those otherwise unsuited or uninterested in STEM fields enter them not out of greed, but out of desperation. Careers in such areas are not merely a lucrative bet, a necessarily safe one. Such is the disparity between soft sciences and liberal arts and STEM degrees' return on investment.

Such thinking may be sensible, but it is hardly sustainable. Workplace variety and meritocracy was one of the jucier promises of 20th century western capitalism; a brief American dream sandwiched between a dusk of nepotism and the dawn of futurism. The natural connection between squeezed industries, increasing automation, and demand for STEM skills makes many young people anxious, and yet some (the nerds who benefit) welcoming towards our forthcoming job-stealing robot overlords. Still, we live in awkward times—what do the people not creating artificial intelligence do while they wait for the [singularity](http://www.vanityfair.com/news/tech/2014/11/artificial-intelligence-singularity-theory)?

[//]: # (Singularity...: http://archive.is/GGHXz)

The idea of universal basic income has been bandied about, but the idea is impractically premature in such a technological purgatory. We are on perhaps on the cusp of a machine-sustained utopia, but, as a foundation, cusps are notoriously unstable. Universal basic income also completely undermines the existential underpinnings of modern life. Minimum-wage workers in poverty, temporarily embarrassed millionaires, and the top 1% all find meaning in the pursuit of wealth—providing for one's family, a metric of personal achievement, or simply greed. And socialist leaders want to simply give us money, no strings attached? Who are our political leaders to take away such hopes?

{%blockquote William Shakespeare, *The Merchant of Venice* %}
All things that are, are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
{%endblockquote%}

Joking(?) aside, happy humans necessarily need to keep occupied. Students passionate about STEM are the lucky ones—they can reasonably expect to get paid to do what they love, while the best their peers in other programs can increasingly hope for is to get paid, period. If you are one of the latter, it is in your best interest to consider how to thread the needle of gainful employment, achieving both career fulfillment and financial independence. {% sidenote side5 A forthcoming post will explore this in greater detail %} Millenials may have been born too late to explore the earth, and to early to explore the galaxy, but just in time to explore their own career motivations. That, at least, is a modern luxury.







*lucrative vs safe