---
layout: post
title: The sexual convolution
subtitle: The best things in life are free?
---

The sexual revolution of the 1960s was supposedly an era of free love. But, according to the millenial media, its contemporary equivalent—hookup culture—is [decidedly loveless](http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/08/tinder-hook-up-culture-end-of-dating). The two terms describe essentially the same "trend" of promiscuity (or sexual liberation, to give it an ideological spin). Yet while free love connotes silly, slutty bohemians engaged in harmless rebellion, "hookup culture" shares the same negative space as its evil twin, "rape culture," or even "consumer culture" and "gun culture." At face value, such vitriolic phrases evoke bacteria more than civil society (civilization?).

In two generations, sexual freedom has come full circle. Millenials, much like their parents, convince themselves that detached sex works for them. Its upsides include freedom, choice, and potentially steamy encounters--at the expense of security, love, and the likelihood of lukewarm ones. Unlike the first sexual revolution, however, modern sexual relationships are better described as a devolution; a collective shug that casually accepts casual relationships. 

The boomers' liberal sexual attitudes brought us STDs and divorce, ~and a sex culture that mercilessly exploited young women ~(at least today, such exploitation is prettily packaged as empowering)~. But at least it had a purpose. More ideaologically-minded hippies were fucking each other and the system at the same time; forcing a cultural shift that rejected the repressive gender roles and stifiling societal expectations of the 1950s. Their more libertine peers were, at the very least, pursued an lifestyle that combined hedonism with optimism. They saw the stable but boring lives of their parents and asked themselves "is this it"?

The same question is now being asked by the baby boomers' babies, who are of course the natural consequences of all their lovemaking. Their ennui is now caused by abundance of choice, rather than the restrictive society their parents fought against. That, and apathy so pervasive that not only they have to worry about catching STDs, but feelings as well. The only way to prevent such an affliction is emotional detachment.

Cold-heartnedness is the number one difference between the free love movement, which at least aspired to reject it, and what its contemporary equivalent nonchalantly embraces. Despite moral panic over wayward millenials, they actually have fewer sexual partners, overall, than their parents {% sidenote %}. They also have fewer marriages, and higher divorce rates. On a surface level (at first glance?), modern courtship is a sordid mixture of charm and cruelty. 

Two of the most pessimistic, and also most discussed, *investigations* of hookup culture include *Vanity Fair*'s "[Tinder and the Dawn of the Dating Apocalypse](http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/08/tinder-hook-up-culture-end-of-dating
)" and *The Atlantic*'s "[Boys on the Side](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/09/boys-on-the-side/309062/)." Shocking stuff. Gender wars are not a new phenomenon, however, and the neither the cynicism of the *Vanity Fair* article nor the detached acceptance of the *Atlantic*'s piece capture the full picture.

The same magazine that published *Boys on the Side*, in 2012, also published the remarkably insightful *Sex and the College Girl*, by author Nora Johnson, 55 years earlier, in 1957. She writes:

{%blockquote %}
Promiscuity [...] demands a certain amount of nerve. It might be misdirected nerve, or neurotic nerve, or a nerve born of defiance or ignorance or of an intellectual disregard of social mores, but that's what it takes. Sleeping around is a risky business, emotionally, physically, and morally, and this is no light undertaking. I have never really understood why it is considered to be so easy for girls to say yes, particularly to four different men over a period of two weeks. On the other hand, it is very easy to go steady. Everybody is doing it [....] The depressing aspect of this perpetual twosome is that it is so often based on sex and convenience.
{% endblockquote %}

Johnson, much like the *Boys on the Side* girls, is slightly disturbed by her observations (analysis? used word already) of dating culture (a least, in this era, young people actually go on dates). Does one avoid the boredom and anxiety of singlehood by becoming "tied up with old Joe, even though he is rather a bore"? Or is it better to take one's chances with "risky business"? Sex, too, is anxiety-inducing, up to a point: as one of her classmates observes, "Freshman year, the problem is what to do when a boy tries to unbutton your blouse; sophomore year, when he reaches up your skirt; and after that, everybody shuts up."

The zeitgeist of Johnson's era is that young people are simultaneously too promiscuous and getting married too early. Johnson speaks of the generation before her, in the "Jazz Age," whose "gay irresponsibility is our heritage." Such hedonism, she says, was rarely positive, and its negative was divorce. And the Jazz Age parents "can not very well forbid adventurousness, nor can they take a very stalwart attitude about sex." Sound familiar? 

Now, millenials' parents worry that they are getting too married too late, or not at all. Who can blame them? In the end, much like their "Jazz Age" parents, all they can do is hope their children learn from their mistakes. 





Rosy retrospection: 60s brought us AIDS

https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/govbeat/wp/2014/09/15/for-the-first-time-there-are-more-single-american-adults-than-married-ones-and-heres-where-they-live/

http://thoughtcatalog.com/daniel-hayes/2015/05/free-love/

http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/09/boys-on-the-side/309062/

http://asr.sagepub.com/content/77/3/435

http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/08/tinder-hook-up-culture-end-of-dating

"While she is managing all this, she must be relaxed and happy, find time to read, paint, and listen to music, think philosophical thoughts, be the keeper of culture in the home, and raise her husband's sights above the television set"

[//]: # (College enrollment: http://archive.is/vB0kk)
